
# layers

## intro

the idea here is to build up the functionality
of the library one step at a time, with each
step building on the previous.

this is both pedagogical and also to investigate
what the final _router_ library actually is - 
what it's capable of, and what it's boundaries are ...
and what it really does.

at each step (layer) we can look at what
we have built, what it means (what it can do,
issues that might come up), and how to ensure
that it is as rigorous and useful as possible.
perhaps also looking at alternatives.

## folders

eventually i will split each layer up into
a separate folder, each with a readme,
a library file (`library.js`?), a usage
file (`main.js`?) and maybe also a test
(`test.js`...).

for now, though, let me spit-ball what
each layer might look like.


## layer 1 - tasks

for the first layer let's build a task
runner.

```js
let tasks = {
    'print hello': () => console.log('hello'),
    'print karl': () => console.log('karl')
}

tasks['print hello']();
tasks['print karl']();
```

this might seem silly - all we can do is
print 'hello' and 'karl' to the console.
but let's see what the bounds of this is - 
what can we do with something like this,
what are the possibilities?

### task list

one thing we could do is have a task list
of some kind that we can then execute,
perhaps we could call it a `batch` or
maybe a `queue`.

```js
let queue = [
    'print karl',
    'print hello'
];

let run = queue => queue.forEach(key => tasks[key]());

run(queue);
```

this is quite cool already - we have our
own virtual machine with a kind of byte-code.
we can pass around instructions, we could
write methods to modify those instructions.
for example

```js
let only_karl = queue => queue.map(key => key == 'print hello' : 'print karl' : key);

only_karl(queue);
```

so we have a filter which replaces instructions
in our list.

### logging

not only that - we can easily implement logging
for our vm quite easily.

```js
let log = [];

let run = queue => {
    queue.forEach(key => {
        tasks[key]();
        log.append(key);
    })
}
```

### stepping

we can also step through our tasks one
at a time

```js
let step = () => if (queue.length>0) tasks[queue.pop()]();
```

### errors

what about errors? what kind of things could go wrong,
and how to deal with them in a generic (perhaps pluggable)
way?

```js
let errs = [];
let err = msg => { errs.push(msg); console.log(`err: ${err}`); }

let step = () => if (queue.length>0) {

    let key = queue.pop();

    if (typeof key !== 'string') { err(`instruction not a string`); return; }
    if (!(key in tasks)) { err(`${key} not in tasks`); return; }

    try {
        tasks[key]();
    }
    catch (e) {
        err(`Could not run task ${key}: ${e}`);
    }
}
```

so we now
 - have an error log
 - make sure the queue is in the correct format
 - make sure the queue items are correct
 - make sure we don't have an error when executing the task

there's a lot more we could do in error handling,
but let's keep going with the layers first
before we continue (you'll see why in layer 3).

### state

one more thing we can add which makes things quite
a lot more complicated. what if the task functions
accessed some outside object?

```js
let log = [];

let tasks = {
    'print hello': () => {
        console.log('hello');
        log.append('printed hello');
    },
    'print karl': () => {
        console.log('karl');
        log.append('printed karl');
    }
}
```

