
# layers

let's build things up one layer at a time.

## packets

say `alice` wants to send a packet (package)
to `bob`.

```js
alice.send(bob, packet);
```

what might the packet be?
and how might bob reply?

clearly bob needs to decide
what to do with the packet.
perhaps one thing, perhaps
many, perhaps none.

let's start by defining a
`router` and some `actions` -
the router looks at the packet
and decides which actions to take.
again, perhaps one, perhaps many,
perhaps none.

> this is similar to packet routing
> on operating systems e.g. IP Tables
> which have rules on what to do with
> data coming in. it includes rejection
> rules as well, not just forwarding

```js
let actions = {
    'log': {
        conditions: {},
        fn: packet => console.log('got packet',packet)
    }
}

let runner = (packet, action) => {
    action.fn(packet);
}

let router = packet => {
    Object.keys(actions).forEach(name => {
        action = actions[name];
        if (match_conditions)
            runner(packet, action);
    })
}
```

why send a packet? why, jim?

well i can think of two reasons - either
alice wants to let bob know something
(like "hey something just happened"),
or alice wants something from bob, like
"hey what was that guys name again".

of course, bob could do anything with
the packet. he could scan the whole
internet. or print something using
an old printer, like dot-matrix...

so we need to get bob to send a packet
back, in case alice needs something in
response. and for that we need to
be able to identify whether a packet
is connected to a previously sent
packet...

> why? can't we just know via the
> connection between alice and bob?
> i should flesh this out but
> not all transport mechanisms let
> you have a persistent connection.
> by de-coupling the two, by not
> assuming we can tell whether a
> packet is a response or not per
> se lets us apply the same
> architecture to any transport,
> even sending in the actual mail,
> like paper envelopes and such.

> might be worth putting this in
> the title or abstract or whatever -
> decentralised transport? not sure
> what to call it ...

so clearly the packet needs to have
some identifier that the sender
put into it. then when a packet
comes in it checks if that id is
present, somehow ...

what else? have we covered everything
that might happen or that we might need
to consider given what we have discussed
so far / the scenario we have drawn out ... ?

well when it comes to responses ... we
may need to consider time. so you could
say "hey i am waiting for this response
and it's been like forever" ...

what else?

well clearly a packet received can cause
another packet to be sent. so if alice
can send a packet to bob then bob should
be able to send a packet to alice.

also _actions_ should have in them an
ability to send packets. and not necessarily
just back ...

also, what about sending a packet to
yourself? in essense this means we could ...
call our own actions ...

and what about state? i mean, one thing
that could occur is a packet changes bob
in some way, makes him more open to
new experiences, less argumentative,
more interested in gardening ... bob is
different now. we can model that generically.

```js
let bob = {
    state: {
        happiness: 4,
        openness: 2,
        likes_gardening: 10
    },
    actions: {
        increase_happiness: state => state.set('happiness',state.get('happiness') + 1)
    }
}
```

i write out the state change in terms of functions
to make a point - if we don't allow direct access
to the state object but instead use function calls
(something we can actually force using proxies in
javascript but that's besides the point here) we
get a lot of benefits, like being able to put guards
in place for bad values, as well as tracing changes
(useful for debugging, and let's you do magic things
like reactive programming where things update on
their own in response to changes).

ok. so alice and bob both have a state. they have
actions. actions can change the state. actions can
send packets. actions occur in response to packets.

why? why are we doing this? how could you do something
like that, karl?!

it's hard to explain because i didn't come upon this
by some great insight but rather trial and error - 
when writing software you want certain things to happen.
you want to be able to understand what you are doing,
you want to be able to trace the effects, you want
to be able to place guards in, to simplify the solution
space ...

and what we've done here, i surmise, is build some
way to generically encapsulate, well, a module...

again i didn't design this out of some kind of
mathematical understanding. rather it's where i
ended up when i kept insisting that all my wants
as a developer be met with the systems i was working
on - being able to have full view of what was
happening. being able to isolate parts. being
able to have things work seemlessly across
boundaries i.e. not having a dozen different
systems i have to keep in my head at the same
time to understand what was happening ...
context switching.

think about it - if bob and alice are both
generic compute units, and the way they
communicate is generic, by which i mean
you could use http, or web sockets, or
in memory - then surely you could design
the entire software ecosystem using these
building blocks: some on a server somewhere,
some more on other servers, yet more on
clients like the browser and others the
mobile phone ... all built using the
same approach, the same set of building
blocks ... just imagine that, the entire
system, all the different moving parts,
using the same set of blocks - some in
python, sure, some in javascript,
whatever language you like, but each
with actions (or handlers?), each with
a state, each with every state change
traceable, each action initiated by
a packet, each packet following the
same conventions, each letting you
respond to packets and logging them
out, everything traceable, everything
serialisable, visualisable, all without
restricting functionality, all with
every piece naturally asynchronous,
all naturally parallel, all naturally
expandable ... imagine having a web
server that showed you graphically
of your whole system, let you click
on any part of it, let you watch
packets flying around ... not just
between servers and between processes
in servers, but between parts of the
processes! you could just keep clicking,
keep zooming in, to see everything,
literally everything, at whatever
scale you wanted - you could record
a second's worth of activity and
go through every part of your software
step by step ... you would have one,
just one, approach needed to debug
every aspect ... every aspect could
be hot-swapped out, a/b tested ...
solving any problem, testing any
feature, deploying, fuzzing, everything
with the same approach. why? because
it's just communication. the heart
of computing is sending something.
doing something with it. sending
something else. maybe this is the analogy
we need. maybe this, and the subsequent
things we can say like actions, like
replies, like timeouts, like a local
state ... maybe those are really
generic enough to be universal.
maybe ... i dunno, let's build it
and see.

what about retries?

see, just taking things to be separable
in this way, we define how things could
work, how everything could work - it
is perhaps the first abstraction, the
real first layer.

and if that's true, then why not take
a look at it, look at all the considerations,
and then standardise it.

does the abstraction apply to every
part of software? what about ...
machine code, what's really happening
in the cpu is `mov` commands, `push`
and `cmp`.

did you know the, i think x64, standard
split the whole architecture into
_move_ commands and everything else ... ?

move data. do something. that's it, kids.

of course, move from where? move to where?
here we are saying there are _places_ 
data moves between. we're also saying ...
well there could be a reply... though really
that's not necessary - just a transport
and some state could handle that. really
it could handle anything.

maybe ... maybe what this is is just ...
the idea of splitting things into parts.

interestingly ... why does there ... why
is there a router, something taking a
packet and sending it to an action, perhaps
multiple actions ...

and who, who knows about these actors,
about bob and alice, this must be a thing
surely ... or otherwise you'd have to tell
bob and alice and visa versa.

but if there is something that knows about
bob and alice ... then surely that is a
kind of router?

is `send` an action? is the source/destination
a `packet` ?

surely when you connect two routers together
that constitutes a packet, something that
could fail, something you could need a reply
to ...

arg. you need some baseline, you have to
assume you have a connection. that you
can specify what is being sent from who
to whom.

ok. `send(from,to,packet)` is the fundamental
notion, the atomic thingy.

and let's just say you apply it to a `hub`
and a hub has multiple actors, actors have
actions and a router, the router takes packets
and decides what to do with them ...

## different from networking

how is this different from ordinary networking
architectures like tcp/ip?

well we're not just concerned with transport.

we define a few things:

- a hub that can connect routers
- a controller that sends packets to actions

even at this high level of abstraction we can
do things like:

- swap out the controller for a different
  set of logic for the router
- list the actions a router has
- log which action the router took against
  which packets

again, this is at such a high level that we
haven't specified how each piece looks,
particularly the packets and the actions.
in fact, swapping out the controller means
you can change the standard you are using -
essentially the controller determines the
protocol / the format of the packets.

in networking we are concerned with moving
information from one place to another. here
we change that to _instructions_. and i think
with just that one step we can use the packet
idea to develop complex, visible, de-centralised,
robust software systems.

another way to look at it is to say that before,
in ordinary networking, a packet contain raw
data, information that had no context, and it
was received and then interpreted by some outside
process, outside of the function of the transport
mechanism. but here we are including the interpretation
into the mechanism.

and by doing so we not only allow us to see more
clearly what is happening in our system, we are
in fact able to encompass as much of the workings
of the system in as we want - one interpretation
of the packet would simply say something like
"if the packet has a field `name` with the value
`file_out` then take the requisite other fields
to write a file to the file system".

however, we could have another handler (better
than 'action'? not sure) that sends a packet
to this handler (the file handler could be
in the same router or in anoter).

so we could for example have a router called
"file access" or "os". you send it packets
which are essentially function calls. then you
could do things with the os with the packet
sending mechanism.

why do this? well you know have all the benefits
of using a send-type mechanism:

- asynchronous
- one system encapsulates everything, meaning:
  - one logging system
  - one upgrade / test path
  - one visibility / debug approach

with everything under one roof
you needn't keep developing interconnects between
different systems. if you develop something like
an authentication mechanism, you do it once at
it applies to everything. if you develop throttling,
same thing. perhaps you want to serialise something.
perhaps you want to be able to re-create things,
send whole system setup's over the wire ... all things
you need only do once because it all uses this one
approach - sending commands, getting back a response.

## scenario

let's flesh out a real scenario.

browser connected to a server via web sockets.
on the server, access to a file system and a database.
on the browser, something to view/change the dom,
as well as a reactive state logic.

right, how might we set this up - what are the pieces?

on the browser, a web socket hub.
what might that look like?

```js
let wshub = require('@routerjs/wshub`);
let dom = require('@routerjs/dom');
let rstate = require('@router/rstate');

let hub = wshub.create('myserver.com',2232);

hub.join('dom',dom());
hub.join('state',rstate());
```

- how do we react to `wshub` not being able to connect?
- we named the dom as `dom`; how do other services find it?

really what we want is a kind of setup object -
something that says what pieces there are,
what we expect from each ...

> random idea - we could pass in a `salt` into the
> server connection in order to ... sort-of encrypt
> the connection hand-shake, in order to make it
> impossible to tell that something on myserver.com
> port 2232 is in fact a wshub router ...

just watched this https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2lEhamPHh3k
makes me think ... well it's interesting, he mentions
three points for controlling one's own data:

- legibility
- agency
- negotiability

legibility = see and understand what's going on.
can you understand all the different sources of data.
what does the data mean? what are the implications?

agency is the capacity to act. can you correct what's
going on? this is like i suppose hot-swapping modules
in a running system ... or even changing the data
itself (which i guess means the state of each router?),
perhaps even to pause the system, look at the packets,
modify them if needs be.

what would it take to be able to ... first, identify
that something is wrong in a running system, then
be able to go in, diagnose what's happening, try out
different possible solutions, and then deploy to
live when you're happy, perhaps un-pausing the system
if needs be ...

> how could you 'pause' a running system?
> you'd have to send messages to all the hubs ...
> assuming they will respond properly ...

---

gad dam, 11 minutes in and i just wonder "why has nobody
done what i am proposing?" https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2PxsyWqZ5dI

types - types are a bad idea. i mean really.
why can't we just have a check function?
what on earth makes people think it's ...
i mean, it's about composability, right?
"this piece only fits in here". ok.

---

again, let's build out a system we want to start with
and see what needs to be done to get it to work with
this component system.

i want something running in a browser. so i open up
a browser and point it to localhost:3000. that means
i need to have a server running. what does that server
do? let's say it sends through just basic html, just
a skeleton, and `main.js`. and let's say `main.js`
simply connects to a web socket server ... and what,
pulls in the components? the actualy code for the
components? are we going that far?

i want an app. a web app. i want a monitoring platform.
also a web app. the monitoring platform must show the
running instances of the web app. it must show all the
other pieces the web app is chatting to. and i want a
bunch of other components - ones the web app is talking
to. others that are talking to one another.

all of this in order to validate an idea - that we can
build complex systems using asynchronous messages.
using components that send asynchronous (or synchronous
if needs be) packets to one another. and that the
entire system, both inner and outer, both inside the
browser javascript software, and connecting said system
to the server, and the server to other components
like other servers, all would use the same packet sending
approach, in a way that makes everything monitorable
and hot-swappable ...

ok. so clearly we have 2 web servers - the app and the
monitor. and both need to talk to a third server, the
web socket server (the same one?).

what does the app do?

what if it shows the contents of a directory on a server
somewhere. like ... a list of files. something that can
be kept up to date live.

ok. and we have a monitoring view on a separate browser
window from which you can investigate all the pieces
and all the messages between them, from what's going on
in the app browser to how the server connects to
web socket and the file watcher...

now - how do we do all of this using an interconnected
web of components passing messages to one another?
where do we start?